[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we are broadcasting
here from beautiful Denver,
Colorado.
So did you know that you can
literally talk your way out
of stress?
That you can actually
heal through communication
instead of medication
in many cases?
Dr. Neha Sangwan is with me.
Her goal is to create
self-care through health care.
She's known as a doctor
of communications,
but she's also a doctor
of internal medicine
and a physician whose main
prescription is communication.
It is, isn't it?
>>NEHA SANGWAN: It is.
At least it's the front
line prescription.
Which is, I look there before
I prescribe someone medication,
whereas I think our
medical system goes
the opposite direction.
>>LISA: Right.
So how did you, as a physician
of internal medicine,
where people are coming
to you with ailments
and usually
intestinally related,
how did you relink that
to their communication?
>>SANGWAN: So really, of course,
right, doctor heal thyself.
It was me and my patients.
But initially I think
people's signals
come to them as whispers.
So they just hear a little
something, you know?
Mine was throat constriction.
So my throat would
just constrict,
and then after a while
I couldn't breathe.
And it almost felt
like a constant sense
of gasping for air.
And then I went to a doctor
convinced that this throat
constriction was a tumor, right?
Because I'd been reading about
it, learning about it, right?
Seeing all these
people who had it.
And they put me out
under anesthesia,
put a camera down my throat,
and said no, you look great.
OK, you're on your way.
Two years later I had
convinced another doctor
to do the same thing who then
said to me, you look great.
I think it's stress.
And I thought, stress?
Are you crazy?
And I just went along my
way until I burned out.
And when I burned out in 2004,
it became very clear to me
I was in the wrong job, I was
in the wrong relationship.
It just wasn't a good fit.
>>LISA: Where do you
think it started?
Take me back to childhood.
Where did that come from?
>>SANGWAN: So I think
it started quite young.
I would say I had a very
colorful, creative, loud older
sister.
And all I wanted was
her affection and love.
And for whatever reason, she
wasn't very interested in me.
[LAUGHS]
Right?
I'm a little bit of like a gnat,
an annoying pest, an 18 month
younger sister who just wants
to do everything you want to do.
And so I think that
was when I started
to learn that my voice
wasn't important.
And I started to learn
from the Indian community
that I grew up in.
My family's amazing.
And they come with
cultural beliefs.
You know, it's about science,
it's about education,
it's about achievement.
It's about, this is
the right way to do it
and you're married by this age
and you have this many children
by this-- like,
they had beliefs.
And as I found myself
listening to those,
it was like a battle to belong.
>>LISA: Did you feel
internally and intuitively
that that wasn't right?
>>SANGWAN: I don't know
that I ever at that age
could hear my own voice.
Because ever since
I was little, I
was looking to them to take
care of me and love me.
And so I learned very
quickly how to please others.
All I wanted was their
love and approval.
>>LISA: Don't we all?
>>SANGWAN: Right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: And so I think
from a very young age
we learn as children what makes
people laugh, what has them
give us a hug,
what gives us love.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANGWAN: And so
I think what we're
doing is we're listening
to their voices
and by the time we get
older, in high school,
we're listening to our peers'
voices louder than our own.
Anything to fit in, right?
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Fiercely.
And it's a matter of
survival sometimes.
>>SANGWAN: It is a
matter of survival.
>>LISA: If I don't fit in here,
then I'm going be ostracized
and not liked, and it's
going to go back to all that.
Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And so you had
that experience as a child,
but when you got to medicine,
you followed the routine
and you went to medical
school and you did what you--
>>SANGWAN: I was a good soldier.
>>LISA: A good girl.
>>SANGWAN: I was so good that my
dad wanted me to be an engineer
and my mom wanted
me to be a doctor.
And as soon as I figured
out they weren't mutually
exclusive, I did both of them.
Like, of course I'll
please the world here.
Of course.
And also, I mean, I had a
love and an ease with math
and science and all of
that, and I loved people.
So it just seemed
like the right fit.
But then when I
got in, I started
listening to my patients.
And they would say things
to me like, you know doc,
thanks so-- I worked
in the hospital.
So it would be heart
attacks, strokes, pneumonias,
the things that really
get people intubated.
And so when they'd
come out and we'd
have them medically stabilized
they would say things like,
doc, thank you for helping
me with this heart attack,
but please don't discharge
me, because I can't go back
to that toxic relationship
and environment.
That's what's killing me.
>>LISA: You heard it again.
>>SANGWAN: And I heard it again.
And then I'd see them again
six months, a year later.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>SANGWAN: And I
thought to myself,
am I really helping them?
Of course I'm helping them
through an acute crisis.
But am I really helping them?
Like, am I helping them
solve the underlying issues
so they don't have
to be here again?
>>LISA: And you realized that
you weren't in that level.
So how did you bridge the gap
to being able to actually--
because you're an internal
medicine doctor, not
a therapist, a psychologist,
and all of that.
But yet they are very linked.
How linked is the
gut to not speaking?
What do you see?
>>SANGWAN: So there
are so many nerves.
A majority of your nerves,
like, major amounts in your skin
and in your GI
tract, or your gut.
So a lot of times the
way stress shows up
is-- have you ever heard that,
a little kid, all the way
from when you're little.
Mom, I have a tummy ache.
I can't go to school.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>SANGWAN: And the parent
will be like, oh, you just
don't want to go to school.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANGWAN: No.
It's because the child
is experiencing something
that they're resisting
or upset about,
and their stomach is turning,
they're getting these signals.
The only way they know how to
describe it is my tummy hurts.
Right?
It's not a doctor tummy ache.
It's a sit down and can we
talk about this tummy ache?
And so I think it
starts very young.
When you're in college, I saw it
play out as hives before exams.
Have you ever heard of people--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
Breaking out in hives
for finals week.
As we get older, I've
noticed that some
of the most common ways that
it shows up in my clients
are acid reflux,
diarrhea, constipation.
Some semblance of just, like,
not feeling OK in your gut.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Let's talk about the
acid reflux for a second,
because there's millions
and millions of people
that take acid
reflux medications.
And it's masking the symptom
of the actual issue that
might be going on.
Is there a percentage
of people that you
would say that
truly have the acid,
or is it really, truly
related to the emotion?
>>SANGWAN: So it's
an and, right?
So I do believe that there
are physical reasons depending
on what you ate last
night or drank last night.
Functional medicine
is a kind of medicine
that really looks into
gluten, dairy, you know,
how do all these things
impact your system?
So there can definitely
be physical causes,
what you're putting
in your body.
There's also mechanical
causes, which
would be, like, your valve at
the bottom of your esophagus
is loose, right?
That's going to let up acid.
There also can be
anxiety and stress
that causes people to have
their body be over stimulated
and be ready to run, that
causes that adrenaline response.
I don't really know
the percentage.
I wouldn't be able to
give you a percentage.
But what I can tell
you is it usually
is a combination of
all of these things.
Because as soon as someone-- we
don't know what comes first--
but as soon as they
start feeling that acid,
either they start getting
nervous and worried
and catastrophizing.
It all works together.
Now were they nervous,
worried, and catastrophizing,
and then they got it?
I'm not usually sure.
But I know that it
all works together.
>>LISA: Yes.
And so do see a certain
amount of children?
>>SANGWAN: Mm hmm.
>>LISA: And when
you see children
that have
gastrointestinal issues,
do you talk to the parents about
the emotional issues behind it?
>>SANGWAN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: You have to, right?
>>SANGWAN: But more than
talking to them, what I do
is I have them watch a session
of me working with their child.
And so the child will
just be talking to me
and I'll have them
coloring, and we'll get up
and we'll start
shaking and dancing.
If they're feeling
something in their body
and they don't
know what to do, we
get them to shake it all out.
And then we stop and I
have them feel their body.
Children are very
connected to their body.
They don't have
all the strategies
we've got in place to make
sure everybody likes us.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
They're just not inhibited.
Yeah.
And so after we do
some of these exercises
then I pick their favorite
song, we put it on,
and I have them dance their way.
And we talk about all of the
things we're grateful for,
and we fill our bodies
back up with everything
we're happy about.
And so the parent can
see different skills.
I really think it's that parents
don't have this skill set,
you know?
How does the body work with
these physical ailments?
And so I think what people
have begun to believe
is that physical ailments
always have a physical cause.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>SANGWAN: And I
believe that you always
have to get checked
out by doctor first.
>>LISA: Wait, do you mean
emotional ailments have
a physical cause, or physical
ailments have a physical cause?
>>SANGWAN: So it's both.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: Sometimes
it's a physical ailment.
If I am, you know, lacking a
certain vitamin or nutrient,
B12 or something
like that, I may
have physical symptoms
resulting from that.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: So there may
be a physical cause.
But that's the
assumption in medicine.
But what I find is
when someone's anxious,
anxiety is a huge problem
in our culture, right?
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>SANGWAN: People
don't sleep at night,
so they put themselves
on all this medication.
But when I actually asked them
what keeps them up at night,
it's not a lack of--
>>LISA: Vitamins.
>>SANGWAN: Sleep--
no, sleep medication.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>SANGWAN: It is this
thing that they've
been unable to say, it's
the grief that they've never
been able to let go of,
it's the conversation
that they don't have
the guts to have.
They're in a toxic
work environment,
they're in a relationship
that's long since expired.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>SANGWAN: When you really
get to the root of it.
>>LISA: That keeps you
up, and it loops and loops
and loops and loops until you
exhaust yourself or never do
fall asleep, and the next
morning you wake up so
exhausted that you have to
take something to stay awake.
>>SANGWAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
I've had many friends
in that situation
and it gets just in a
very, very bad place,
and you wind up in rehab.
>>SANGWAN: Yep.
>>LISA: So, yeah.
>>SANGWAN: It goes out
of control pretty quick.
>>LISA: Mm hmm.
Very fast.
Well, I want you to take
a look at Dr. Neha here
talking at a Ted Talk, and
she explains a lot of this.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-And what struck me the
most was my patients
weren't afraid of dying.
They were afraid that they
had never lived fully.
So they taught me what 13 years
of medical education did not.
That it wasn't
just the anatomical
and the physiological
breakdown of their bodies
that I was dealing with.
Something had begun
long, long ago.
They had either stopped
listening to themselves
and their body like
Brandon, they had shut down
their emotions
like Juan, or they
had given up all the things
that matter to them like Lily.
And then somehow this
catastrophic event happened,
and they showed up
metaphorically on their knees
with all of us
together realizing
that these things
were all connected.
So I wish I could tell
you that I am smart enough
to have used these patients'
stories and learned myself.
But the truth is, I wasn't.
I had this awakening
that began in me,
and I knew that this authentic
connection that I was creating
for them was something I needed
to take long before they showed
up in the ICU.
How could I impact
them long before?
Except I wanted to
squash that thought.
Listen, I had great
security and stability
with a partnership
and a paycheck, OK?
People paid me to
take care of them
after everything had happened.
Would anyone pay me
to do what I loved?
So I began numbing
out my own symptoms.
I had a perfected
equation to get me
through my hospital shifts.
It was two ice cold 16 ounce
Mountain Dews plus a king size
Snickers bar, and I could get
through any shift you gave me.
So I heard some laughter out
there and I want to know,
I think that's coming
from the students.
Because you know what it takes
to get through finals week.
So you have your
own equation, and I
want you to think
about what that is.
You know this isn't
going to end well, right?
So here I am.
I burned out.
I was on medical
leave June 17, 2004.
And I had to ask
myself the questions
that I had so often
asked other people.
Neha, why you?
Why burn out, and why now?
What message had it
come to give you?
The answers didn't
come right away for me.
I checked it out
with some colleagues
to see if they had ever
experienced something
like this.
I then began to listen
to my mind and my body,
and I started journaling.
And what I read on those
pages scared me to death.
I didn't just want
to help people
before they ended
up in the hospital.
I wanted to create
self-care in health care.
I wanted to help
heal the healers.
I wanted to become a
master in communication
and combine it with my
knowledge of health,
and I wanted to use that
to go and bridge nations.
That scared me.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So you are known as the
Doctor of Communication, which
I mentioned earlier.
So what type of signals do
you feel in your own body
when you're not
speaking your truth?
I mean, just to use
you as an example.
Because I know in my body,
it's like my intestines
get turned into knots and bows.
So what do you feel when
you're not speaking your truth?
Back when you didn't
speak your truth.
>>SANGWAN: No, I still feel it.
>>LISA: Really?
>>SANGWAN: Yes.
Now it's a friendly reminder.
Back then it was a whisper
until it became paralyzing,
which is the throat constriction
turned cutting off my air.
And now at the slightest
hint of throat constricting,
heart racing, and
stomach turning,
it's my signal that I've
just not spoken my truth.
And in that moment I ask myself,
do I need to pause and go back
and readdress this,
renegotiate what just happened?
Or is this something,
like, what was it
about this that I wasn't saying?
So my body tells me right away.
>>LISA: And so do you
find yourself speaking
your truth more and
more and more now?
>>SANGWAN: Absolutely.
It's kind of like, the way I
describe this experience is,
I've become a
self-cleaning oven.
[LAUGHS]
It's like, you know,
something happens.
And what I do is,
I don't go talking
to everyone about everything.
But I have this three time rule.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: The first time
something happens, I notice it.
Mm.
OK.
The second time it
happens, I mentally
put it in my mental
filing cabinet.
I might need this.
The third time it
happens I say, hey Lisa.
You know, I wanted to talk to
you about yesterday at lunch,
our meeting.
And it'll take about 15 minutes.
I'm wondering when's
a good time for you.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
You actually go right for it.
I'm sure I was raised with that
good girl attitude as well,
because I recall situations
in conversations,
I wish I could have said that
and I wanted to say this,
and I didn't.
So in your body, so
you're teaching people
to really feel that
sensation in your body.
Because we know
when it's not truth.
>>SANGWAN: We do.
>>LISA: And it
actually sometimes,
when other people are
as communicative as you
are and say exactly
what they're feeling,
it makes me feel awkward
when they say that.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: It's so ingrained in me.
But I want a step.
I want a process
that can show me
how to nip it right
away, how to do that.
Because that's going to be
key for me in the future.
So say your boss,
someone who you know.
You don't want to get fired.
This would lead to, like,
you losing their job,
blah, blah, blah.
How do you say to them, look,
you're not treating me nicely.
How do you say
that to your boss?
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Right?
>>SANGWAN: Right.
Or your spouse or
your sister, right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
So there's a few steps here.
The first one is, you have to
know what those signals are.
And it sounds like you
know what yours are.
Your body talks to you.
Your physiology talks to you.
I call it your
physical intelligence.
>>LISA: Yes, my
stomach turns to stone.
>>SANGWAN: Right.
Well, that's an
uncomfortable feeling.
So most people will go
first and numb that out.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: So-- excuse me.
What they'll do is they'll
go get a chocolate chip
cookie and a latte.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: OK?
So the first step is
actually tuning in.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: And when you do,
there's a lot of ways to tune
in.
Some people take deep breaths,
they manage themselves.
It's that discomfort
in someone's body
that stops them from
speaking their truth.
But this is the secret.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: The secret is
you come to a decision point
many times in your day.
Do I tell the truth, do I not?
Do I say what I really
mean, do I hold back?
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
>>SANGWAN: The deal is that
if you feel that discomfort
and you numb it, you're going to
get a short term effect, which
is your short term high
of just avoiding it.
Like, ooh, got away with that.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
I escaped the lion.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
Oh, ooh.
Thank God I escaped
that conflict.
But long term, every time
you look in the mirror,
you're going to respect
yourself a little bit less.
Wow, why didn't I
have the courage
to stand up and say that?
How come I didn't say what I
really meant in that meeting?
How come I didn't tell them
that that wasn't OK, right?
Now the flip side of that is
you come to that decision point
and you become aware of
the physical intelligence
in your body.
And you decide, you know what?
I'm going to use my breathing,
I'm going to calm myself,
and I'm going to deal with
the short term discomfort--
not the short term high of
avoiding it or numbing it.
You're going to take the
short term discomfort
and lean into that
discomfort for the long term
high of liking yourself, of
having great relationships,
of investing in your life.
So one thing I
don't say is, this
is going to ever become easy.
It's not even easy for me.
>>LISA: So you said lean into--
>>SANGWAN: The discomfort.
It's only short term.
Because the thing that gets
these signals to go away
is that you actually
acknowledge and address them.
>>LISA: That you say
something about it.
>>SANGWAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>SANGWAN: So that's
the first thing.
The first thing is, you've
got to know your signals.
You've got to know
that there is going
to be a little discomfort.
And that's just your
body talking to you.
>>LISA: Mm hmm.
And then lean into it and
then override the wave,
or ride the wave--
>>SANGWAN: Ride the wave.
>>LISA: --so that you
can have the greater
gain, which is that freedom.
>>SANGWAN: But it's
going to actually
be a dip of discomfort.
So it's not going to feel
like riding that wave.
It's actually going to feel like
when you're on a roller coaster
and you're just going over.
Like, oh, this doesn't
feel comfortable.
Then the second
thing you want to do
is when you're talking--
let's say it's your boss, OK?
What you want to say-- or,
let's say you're my boss
and I need to have
this conversation.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: How about that?
>>SANGWAN: OK, that
would be an easy way.
If I start off and I say to you,
you're not treating me well.
Do you see how all
of a sudden, aren't
some walls going
to go up for you?
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>SANGWAN: It's like this.
That's what it feels like.
>>LISA: Right.
You're pointing fingers.
Right.
>>SANGWAN: But what
I need to do is
I need to share with
you-- because I've already
set up the conversation.
I've told you what time I need,
when's a good time for you?
So you're listening, OK?
And now I'm going
to say, hey Lisa.
You know, thank you for
having this meeting with me.
And I just wanted to talk
to you about something
I experienced yesterday
in our group meeting.
And I just noticed
that when you said,
thank you Team A for
doing what you wanted
and making the right
choice, I noticed
that I didn't feel included
because I'm a consultant.
And I noticed that
in that moment,
I just felt a little
bit distanced from you,
and I didn't really
feel acknowledged.
And so I was wondering,
did you notice that?
And do you feel that I
contributed to the project?
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANGWAN: Do you get it?
Did it take a long time?
>>LISA: No, but
it's penetrating.
>>SANGWAN: Right.
But who am I talking about
in that conversation?
>>LISA: You.
>>SANGWAN: I'm acknowledging
the vulnerability
of why that felt
so icky inside me.
I'm clear.
I've set up a time with you.
It's important to
me that you hear me
and that it's a
good time for you.
>>LISA: So then it
doesn't necessarily
matter what the boss
says, because you're
taken care of in that moment.
>>SANGWAN: And I've
spoken my truth.
>>LISA: Yeah, you've
spoken your truth.
>>SANGWAN: My boss may
say, oh, I didn't do that.
I included you.
>>LISA: But it doesn't matter.
>>SANGWAN: It doesn't matter.
You listen and you can
even say, like, oh,
what I hear you saying
is this, this, and this.
It sounds like you thought
you did include me.
Is that what you're telling me?
Right?
>>LISA: I love the way
you're talking about it,
just drop into that feeling and
feel it and then communicate.
>>SANGWAN: Allow
it to inform you.
>>LISA: Allow it to.
Yes.
That's beautiful.
Take a look at this
video and you can see.
It's about meeting
Dr. Neha, and she
explains a lot of the
communication techniques
that she uses.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Hi, I'm Doctor Neha.
I'm so glad you're
here and that you're
interested in learning more
about the communication cure.
This is the beginning of
a wonderful journey where
you are going to learn how
to improve your health,
decrease your stress levels,
strengthen your relationships,
and create the
life that you want.
So let's get
started, because I've
got a lot to share with you.
What most people don't
understand is that clear,
direct communication is
directly related to your health.
As a medical and
communication expert,
I travel all over the world,
helping heal toxic dynamics
in home and work
relationships that
are literally
making people sick.
So people don't come
to me saying, "Doctor,
I have an I can't communicate
with my boss problem."
What they say is, "I
have a stomachache,"
or "I have a headache," or
"I can't sleep at night."
I'd like to teach you how to
interpret these signals coming
from your body in order
to connect what you think
to how you're feeling,
to what you're wanting,
and, ultimately, what
you're saying and creating
in the world.
So let's start with the basics.
Your headache isn't
an Advil deficiency.
There are many
ways that your body
tries to communicate with you,
especially when you're out
of alignment.
Let's look at this
physiologically
and tell you what's happening.
Suppose you say yes
to staying at work
and taking an extra
shift when you really
need to be at your son or
daughter's soccer game.
Do you say yes when
you really mean no?
Because pay attention
to what happens next.
Your body will
give you a signal.
Maybe it's your
stomach dropping,
maybe your heart
will start racing.
For me it's throat constriction.
Whatever it is, your
unconscious mind
is trying to talk to you
through your physical body
and tell you that you just said
yes when you really meant no.
So my real work lies in
inspiring people like you
to think differently about
the way you communicate
and giving you practical
tools to improve your health,
while simultaneously helping
you transform your life.
So we're faced with many
epidemics in health care
and I'm wondering who's
diagnosing and treating
the my boss makes
me crazy syndrome?
Or the I feel powerless in
my relationships epidemic?
So if you'd like to
manage your manager
and lose belly fat
while you're doing it,
or if you'd like to
turn around seemingly
impossible relationships
with your loved ones
and boost your immune
system in the process,
sign up for ongoing
communication tips,
and together we'll connect
the dots between your health
and your ability to communicate.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: All right.
So are there specific
relationships
that you have found between
kidney stones, gallbladder,
acid reflux, upper respiratory.
So let's start with gallbladder.
What types of
emotional relationships
happen as a result of
having a toxic gallbladder?
>>SANGWAN: You know
what's funny is,
I wish I could recite this
off the top of my head.
You know who has
actually done this
that is not a doctor
is-- you know Louise Hay.
>>LISA: Yes.
I was going to
just say that, yes.
>>SANGWAN: "You Can
Heal Your Life."
In the back of her
book she breaks it down
by all the ailments, right?
And sometimes I
actually look at that.
And I look at that and I
say, like, oh, that's right.
Or I'll ask my client,
does this ring true to you?
The one that I do remember
is cancer having a lot
to do with resentment.
And that where it's
located, like breast cancer,
may have something to do with
mother resentment, and ways
that our body actually plays
out and shows us how it maps.
Typically what I have
seen in the hospital,
the literature that I've read
around heart attacks, really,
and their relationship
to feeling lonely,
isolated, and depressed.
So if someone has
a heart attack,
if they become depressed--
which, who wouldn't?
>>LISA: Right.
Of course.
>>SANGWAN: They are four times
more likely in the next six
months to have another one.
>>LISA: Huh.
Unless they--
>>SANGWAN: Take
this as a wake up
call that their body is
telling them, hey, what do you
need to speak as your truth?
What in your life do
you need connection?
What is it that
you're longing for?
>>LISA: Ah.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
>>LISA: Connection.
That's a good one.
Because the heart is connected
electrically and our whole body
is connected.
Yeah, when that
breaks, but we're
not-- so speaking
of connection, we
have such a ridiculously
busy, fast paced world,
and we've gotten really
addicted to the phones.
And where you could be sitting
for five seconds waiting
for someone to come back
and you're just immediately
on the-- you know, there's that
real propensity to disconnect
all the time with the
smartphones or whatever it is.
So what do you see in the body
that has sacrificed internally
from that disconnection
with people?
>>SANGWAN: So that's
a great question.
You know, when you
said that we disconnect
when we are on our phone,
what's interesting is
I think people believe that this
is actually them connecting.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>SANGWAN: And they are
getting stimulation by this.
Is there another tweet?
Is there another--
like, what's next?
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
What's the latest this?
And so what I think
has happened is
we seem to think that our
head and what we're thinking
and what we're getting
from the outside world
is where we get our information.
And even though it's only an
18 inch drop to your heart,
I actually believe this is
where we get our information.
And so I think there's a way in
our busy, over stimulated world
that we have begun
to function just
from our head and
our thoughts, and we
get most of that input
from the outside world.
And so I think what
we've sacrificed
is actually turning up the
volume of our own hearts
and what we want and
listening to ourselves.
Instead, we have a
much greater focus
on external and other people's
ideas of what is correct.
>>LISA: Wow, this is
such key information
because one of the things
that I've always remembered
is a person who did hospice care
and spent thousands of hours
at the bedside of
people who passed over.
Or not passed over.
That are about to pass over.
And the biggest
complaint they have
is unresolved communication.
>>SANGWAN: It's true.
>>LISA: I wish I would've
said that to my mother.
I wish I'd not held onto
that with my brother.
And that they wanted
to go back and say it.
>>SANGWAN: Yes.
And the amazing thing that
people don't understand
is, everything's renegotiable.
>>LISA: You can do that.
>>SANGWAN: You can do that.
It's that people don't
know how to find the words.
Their body starts
speaking and they
start getting so uncomfortable
that they don't even
think it's possible to do it.
And that's what I
want to teach them.
>>LISA: Take marriage,
long term marriage.
And you're in a
marriage for so long,
and habits and patterns
take over sometimes.
>>SANGWAN: That's right.
>>LISA: And to even
say, look, I really
want to be this
way with you again.
Can we do this again?
There's not even-- it's so
tense-- oh god, how could I
possibly say that?
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: So you're saying
override the wave.
>>SANGWAN: Well, it
repairs new tools.
One thing I don't want to
tell people or give them
the idea is like, oh,
all you have to do
is push through that discomfort
and you're going to be fine.
Because then what they're going
to do is have verbal vomit.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>SANGWAN: You know,
they're just going to go--
[FAKE VOMITS]
--I need to tell
you all this stuff.
There's actually tools.
There's actually-- like,
when I was speaking
to you about the
example of the boss,
the first tool there was
you listening to your body
and connecting,
mapping out your body.
So doing a body map.
Figuring out what it means.
The second one was when I
came in and spoke to you,
I used I in my pronouns.
Not you.
>>LISA: Great.
>>SANGWAN: So get out
of blaming, right?
Also, another tool
that we did there was I
set up the conversation
for success.
I told you the topic I
wanted to talk about,
I told you how
long it would take,
and I asked when was
a good time for you.
Those are all tools
that if people
aren't aware of how
to do these things,
they wonder why it's a disaster.
>>LISA: Ah.
So what are the most common
mistakes people make?
>>SANGWAN: In trying
to have a conversation?
>>LISA: Yeah.
In speaking their truth.
>>SANGWAN: Is that they
think their truth is
about blaming somebody else.
>>LISA: They did this to me.
>>SANGWAN: You did
this, you did that.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
And really, what I
want to say is, the way
that I-- so this is
what I heard or saw.
This is the story
I made up about it.
Because you don't
know if it's true yet.
>>LISA: Oh, true.
You can make a big
story up about it.
This, then this, then they
said that and they felt that.
>>SANGWAN: You know what?
And I saw her talking to him.
And you know what
they were about?
They were talking about us.
I knew it.
I knew-- did you see them?
And meanwhile, I've
never asked them
what they were talking about.
They might have
just been talking
about the latest show
they're going to.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: But I am so sure
that my insecurities and what
stories I'm making up are true.
So that's the second big
mistake I think people make,
which is they don't get curious.
So one of the things I say
is get curious, not furious.
Right?
Because first figure out
if whatever you're thinking
is true.
And then I think
really what they
need to do is be clear
about what they want
and what they value in order
to make clear decisions,
and know what you want
to say to someone.
What do you want out
of this conversation?
>>LISA: What do you value?
That's a good point.
What do you value?
So think about
that ahead of time.
You want to improve
the relationship.
Do you want to let go
of the relationship?
>>SANGWAN: That's right.
>>LISA: So you think
about that ahead of time.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah, you want
to know, what do you want?
>>LISA: It's more that we
can grab onto tools when
we're in that moment of, oh god.
You can just file it through
in your mind and go, OK.
This, this, this, and this.
Not that it disconnects you
from your emotion, but sometimes
it just is a great
starting point.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
And it actually helps you
process your emotions.
Because if I say yes to you
to doing something and then
I notice that I'm afraid, right?
I told you when I said I'd do
the book deal I was petrified,
right?
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>SANGWAN: And in that fear now,
now that helps me get curious.
Am I fearful because
I don't think
it's going to be a good book?
Am I fearful because I
haven't written a book before?
Do I think I'm going to fail?
What is that?
So our emotions give us clues.
Our emotions are just a guide.
>>LISA: You have such a-- I
mean, maybe it's just practice.
But you have such a
great way of really,
truly knowing your
feelings even.
I mean, how do you
know your feelings?
Because I would just
stop at I'm afraid.
I wouldn't know why.
I wouldn't be able to research
that that fast in that moment
when you have a five minute
interaction with somebody.
And that's sometimes
how deals happen
is that you create sparks,
ideas happen, and then
you commit yourself, you
over commit yourself.
And I don't figure out how I
feel about it until much later.
>>SANGWAN: OK, so you're one of
the people-- which, this isn't
uncommon-- you need time
to process something.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANGWAN: So your job is
to find your pause button,
like a DVD player or a piece of
technology has a pause button.
So do you.
So you get to say,
if I make you--
let's say you made me a
great offer to do something.
And so I would say,
Lisa, thank you so much.
Like, this was so
generous of you.
And I notice right now my
heart's racing a little bit,
and so I know I'm excited.
I want to just take the
weekend to think about it
and kind of sleep on it
and kind of brainstorm it.
And you know what?
I so appreciate you, and
I will be back to you
on Monday morning.
Does that work for you?
>>LISA: That was a great
way of saying something.
[LAUGHS]
Oh, my god.
How liberating.
Are there different styles of
people that you've encountered?
>>SANGWAN: Oh yeah.
>>LISA: OK well, what
are some of the others?
>>SANGWAN: Some people
will say yes in the moment.
And what I'll have
to work with them on
is how to renegotiate that
so it would sound like this.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANGWAN: Hey Lisa,
you know yesterday
when you asked me about that
incredible, generous offer
that you gave me?
I noticed last night
I didn't sleep.
And I noticed that I just
kept ruminating over the fact
that I've never
done this before.
And I think I'm going to be
someone who needs extra help.
And so I need to talk
to you about that,
because I don't think it
could be done by Friday.
I'm wondering, could
I have this support?
Would you be willing to
help me with this support?
And could we extend it one week?
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
I do that all the time.
[LAUGHTER]
Over committing.
Because it sounds so great, and
I'm so caught up in the moment.
And then I realize,
there's not enough time
in the world to do
something like that.
Yes, absolutely.
>>SANGWAN: And you
want to name that.
When you're in with people and
you've just over committed,
or you hear yourself doing
it, what you say is, hey.
I love the idea you've
just presented to me.
My tendency is to over commit.
I want to make a full
commitment to you.
Let me think about
this overnight,
and I'm going to get
back to you tomorrow.
>>LISA: Because there's
opportunity everywhere.
>>SANGWAN: There is opportunity.
>>LISA: Yes, that's in
the back of my mind going,
wow, this would be
a great opportunity.
But then something else
is going to have to go
and I need to think about that.
And that's, you know, what
are the consequences of that?
And I need to talk
to that person.
Well, I'm having the
conversation with you
I should be having
with someone else.
[LAUGHS]
But thank you for that.
We're going to take a look at
here a video of more tools.
These are called the
i-Five communication tools
with Dr. Neha.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
-Hi, I'm Dr. Neha, a physician,
communication expert,
and creator of the i-Five
conversation, a practical tool
that's at the heart of
the communication cure.
The i-Five conversation
is for anyone
who's interested in handling
challenging conversations
with ease in order to
improve their interpersonal
relationships, decrease
your stress levels,
and improve your overall health.
The i-Five conversation makes
five important connections
that allow you to have
challenging conversations
with ease.
These five components
are interpreting
your body, thoughts,
feelings, desires,
and integrating all of
those into taking action
in order to have
honest dialogue.
The i-Five conversation
can best be
understood by using an example.
So let's look at
two interpretations
of the same scenario.
Suppose it's the morning
of your performance review
and you walk by your
boss's office, say hello.
Your boss looks
up, says nothing,
and then looks down
and continues texting.
There are multiple ways that you
can interpret this interaction.
The first aspect is interpreting
your body's signals.
They come in both
externally and internally.
Externally, your body gathers
data through your five senses.
What you see, hear,
taste, touch, and smell.
In this scenario, you saw
your boss in his office.
You said hello.
You saw him look up at you.
You heard nothing, and you
saw him resume texting.
So the senses used to
gather data in this scenario
would have been your
sight and your hearing.
So your body also communicates
with you internally.
It sends you
messages and signals.
For example, when your
boss didn't answer you,
your heart may have started
racing or your stomach turning.
These are also
indications from your body
that you need to
pay attention to.
As you interpret
your body's data,
you then move into
the second part
of the i-Five conversation,
your thoughts.
From what you're
just experienced
you gather this data
and you put it together
to create a story
about what it means.
You might have thought that
because your boss didn't
acknowledge you, it meant
that you didn't perform
as well as you did last year.
So the story you
make up will lead
to how you feel,
and feelings are
the third component of
the i-Five conversation.
In this scenario,
you would likely
be feeling disappointment,
worry, or fear
about your upcoming review.
So this leads us to
the fourth component
of the i-Five conversation,
interpreting your desires.
So from this last experience if
you felt disappointment, worry,
or fear about your
upcoming review,
this may lead you to want
to talk to your coworkers
and tell them that your
boss is in a bad mood
and to avoid him at all costs.
It may even cause you to want
to avoid your review altogether.
The final component of
the i-Five conversation
is integrating all
the other components
in order to take action.
So in this experience
you may show up
at your review with
closed body language
and be unreceptive to feedback.
Now let's look at this
through another interpretation
of the i-Five conversation,
what you gathered objectively
through your body externally
through what you saw
and what you heard,
as well as internally.
Your heart racing,
your stomach turning.
Those remain the same
in the second scenario.
What's different in this
scenario is your thoughts
and whether or not
you get curious.
It's about the story you make up
about the data you've gathered.
In this example, instead
what if you chose to think,
I wonder if my boss is OK?
I wonder if he has
something going on?
Maybe there's some way that
I can be of support to him.
Or better yet, I
wonder if he heard me.
If that's the story that
you make up from the data
that you gathered,
it's obvious that you
may feel different feelings
from the first scenario.
Rather than feeling
disappointment, worry, or fear
around your review,
you may be feeling
curiosity or concern
for your boss.
This will lead you to a
very different desire.
Instead of dreading
your performance review,
you may actually be
looking forward to it
and show up and take action
by being open, curious,
and receptive.
From this example, you can
see how the same scenario can
create dramatically
different outcomes based
on the story you make up and
how you interpret the five
components of the
i-Five conversation.
Those five components, again,
include your body, thoughts,
feelings, desires, and how
you integrate all of those
into taking action.
How you interpret and integrate
the i-Five conversation
matters.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I was
talking earlier about
feeling uncomfortable
with people
who really speak the truth.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
So my husband's like that.
He will tell you how
it feels instantly,
and I'll be over there
crawling into a corner
and embarrassed because he
spoke his truth so fast.
So is that a different
style of a person
who speaks really fast
about their truth,
and then me who is on
the other side of it?
Is there a way to soft?
So how do I express
my feelings when
he's making me feel
uncomfortable without
invalidating him
speaking his truth?
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
OK, so the first
thing is, he isn't
making you feel uncomfortable.
That would be like him
being able to go like this
and go like that.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: OK?
>>LISA: He can't.
>>SANGWAN: So he can't
make you feel comfortable.
What you're noticing is
is that you're actually
choosing to react in a way that
is feeling uncomfortable, OK?
And this usually stems from
something a long time ago.
>>LISA: That's big.
>>SANGWAN: So you have some
experience in your past,
I would venture to guess,
where someone really
used to speak their truth.
Is that true?
>>LISA: Yep.
>>SANGWAN: In your family?
>>LISA: Yes, and I was told
I didn't have an opinion.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
How old were you?
>>LISA: This was growing up.
>>SANGWAN: The first
time you remember it.
>>LISA: Eight.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Eight.
>>SANGWAN: So what happens?
How do you know that
your husband is actually
ramping up and
speaking his truth?
Like, what happens?
What changes?
How do you know it's coming?
>>LISA: He will
just blurt it out.
>>SANGWAN: So he'll
maybe speak quick, loud?
>>LISA: It will be awkward, too.
>>SANGWAN: Like abrupt?
>>LISA: Yes, abrupt.
That's a good word for it.
Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: So he'll speak
and it'll be like this, ah!
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: He'll
say whatever it is.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
So in that moment
what happens is
that you become that
eight-year-old little girl.
It's called in your
amygdala in your brain
where it stores the
memories of things
that felt traumatic or unsafe
for you when you were little.
So all of the sudden,
you become as effective
as that eight-year-old
little girl.
And so what you
want to do is-- I
don't know if your
husband's going
to appreciate me saying
all this, but here we go.
Next time he blurts
something out,
I want you to take
a really deep breath
and notice the physical
sensations that
are happening for you.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: OK?
When he's having that
moment of just saying it,
you can imagine that
he's pretty uncomfortable
and stressed too, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: And usually when
people are blurting something
out or they're just
saying it like that,
it's because they're
dispelling their discomfort.
And so if he was a little
kid, what would you
do to that little--
What would you say?
What would you do with that
little kid who had that moment?
>>LISA: I realize that you might
feel uncomfortable right now.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah, you might even
pick him up and give him a hug,
right?
If he was little.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: He just
happens to be your size
and connected to your heart and
love and all that stuff, right?
>>LISA: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>SANGWAN: So what I
want you to do next time
is imagine him little and
he's having this experience.
And I want you to
see yourself as big.
You're not eight anymore.
You're grown up.
And I want you to imagine
him, and what would you do?
You'd give compassion.
You'd get curious about
that child, right?
And what's happening,
and what's hurting him?
So I want you to just take that
moment, take a deep breath.
Imagine that he's trying
to communicate something
to you that he thinks
you might not be getting.
And get curious
and compassionate.
I want you to ask yourself, what
would curiosity and compassion
do now?
>>LISA: Ask myself
in that moment?
And then just do that, just take
a minute or hug him or agree?
>>SANGWAN: You might not want to
hug him in that moment, right?
Because that might be
too big of a stretch.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANGWAN: But what you might
want to say-- otherwise you
make a pact with him
outside of that time.
>>LISA: Ah, good idea.
>>SANGWAN: And it
can be like, honey,
when we do this what it
means is we just stop.
And you figure out
how you connect.
If it is through a hug and you
feel like you could do that,
try it.
You can always renegotiate
it if it doesn't work.
If what you do is
go like this and it
means we both get to go
for a walk in 15 minutes
and meet back here and have
tea and do our own thing
and have that talk, we do that.
But two people need to
negotiate between each other
how to make that different.
>>LISA: And set it
up ahead of time.
We have a phrase
called white flag.
Like, if there's a moment
where we're both off the rails,
we say, "White flag."
Walk away.
And then we'll figure it
out later, but that's it.
>>SANGWAN: But what are you
going to do in those moments
when you do get to figure it out
later that changes the outcome?
And for you it's going to
be curiosity and compassion.
You think it's for him,
but it's actually not.
You know what it is?
It's for that
eight-year-old little girl
that was scared, that felt
like her voice didn't matter.
It's for her that you're
becoming compassionate.
And as you start doing
that, your husband actually
ends up being your greatest
teacher because he allows
you to access that little
girl and help heal her.
So he actually becomes
a big gift in your life.
>>LISA: Wow.
Talking about a gift.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: You are a
gift to many people.
>>SANGWAN: Thank you.
>>LISA: Let's talk
about headaches.
Do you ever see a
relationship between people
that maybe don't speak their
truth and headaches, or even
severe migraines?
>>SANGWAN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Talk about that.
So I have clients that
have felt-- I really
believe at the core, we may
look different externally.
We may be different cultures.
We may have been
raised differently.
But at our core, my
belief is that all of us
want to be heard,
seen, and valued.
>>LISA: That is absolutely true.
>>SANGWAN: And so whether or
not someone feels those things,
for me I've seen a pretty
strong link to many signals,
but headaches is a big one.
And often sometimes
clients who even
have medical doctors
in their family,
the only way that they can get
a timeout or a break in the end
is when they're ill.
So the way that I can
get you off my back
is-- and they don't
do it consciously.
They're not even aware of it.
They're not even
aware of the link.
But the way that I can do
that is by, when I am ill,
I get attention, love,
and care from you,
because you understand
that language.
>>LISA: Or I get an excuse
to take a break from you.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah, and
I get to be quiet.
I get peace.
I get space around me.
So aside from the
people, the other piece
is when people don't have a
medical community around them,
oftentimes it's when they
get the love and healing care
and attention where someone
is just tender with them.
They get that peace and quiet.
>>LISA: Or even in the
case of a migraine,
you get to turn off every--
maybe there's no other excuse
to turn everything
off in your life.
You can turn all the
lights out and it's dark
and you get to be with yourself.
>>SANGWAN: And you get to
give yourself the excuse.
You get to get off the
hook with yourself.
>>LISA: Yes.
And along those
lines, breathing.
Asthma.
Where do you see--
you have a technique
that you teach
around breath, right?
>>SANGWAN: Yeah, I do.
And it's really just
simple breathing.
First of all, stress exacerbates
or causes more than 95%
of illness.
We know that.
>>LISA: That's been
very well proven.
>>SANGWAN: Right.
>>LISA: I've heard higher.
>>SANGWAN: Even higher, right?
Some people say it's 100%.
Everything is induced.
Stress also decreases our
immune function, right?
And so our immune function is
when we repair things, right?
It's our defense system.
It takes care of us.
And so asthma is a reactive
airway disease, right?
And so that's like the your
lungs and all the branches
of the air sacs in there,
they have muscles around them.
And it's like a
reaction that happens.
Whether it's from
an allergy outside,
whether it's from an
emotional response,
there's a reactivity
that happens.
And you cannot take in breath.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
So it's a constriction of
little muscles in the lungs.
>>SANGWAN: And so the
interesting thing, yeah.
There is a link.
There's a link to cold weather.
There's a link to
all sorts of things.
I do believe there's
also an emotional link.
Of course that's my lens, so
I realize that I sometimes
see it through that lens.
And stress gets a
big bucket, right?
But it's around what actually
causes that at the bottom.
So you were asking
about breathing, right?
So really quick.
It's simple, deep breathing.
But what I would
find when I went down
to the emergency department,
who in the emergency department
doesn't have the thought
going them that I might die?
Everybody's sitting in that
emergency department thinking
[GASPS]
What if?
>>LISA: That's how
they got there, yeah.
>>SANGWAN: OK, so they're
all sitting there.
So I would get
called downstairs.
And they would say, "Dr.
Sangwan, this person
is having a heart
rate of 110, and we
think that you
need to see them."
I'd come downstairs
and they would
be breathing just like this.
[SHARP GASPS]
No, doc, I'm breathing.
But what they were doing
was reverse breathing.
So what I'm going to show you
right now is to actually--
and we're going to
uncross our legs.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SANGWAN: OK?
Put our feet on the ground.
And this helps with
any kind of anxiety.
And so what you want to do
is you have to-- anxiety
is a fear about
what might happen.
It's trying to
control the future.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>SANGWAN: OK?
So one of the antidotes to
that, and I speak about this,
is that you want to
get in the present.
You need to get someone
who's having a panic
attack in the present
moment, right?
So the first thing you do is
get their feet on the ground,
get them to take a deep breath.
And when they do
I'm going ask you
to feel your ribcage
expanding and contracting.
Bring awareness to your ribcage
>>LISA: So you have to
breathe deep to do that.
>>SANGWAN: Right?
And we're taught as women,
hold your stomach in.
Suck it in, right?
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANGWAN: OK.
Now you're going to put your
hand on your abdomen, OK?
And you're going to take
a nice deep breath in.
And as you do, I want
your hand to move outward.
And as you breathe out,
I want your belly button
to move back towards your spine.
[BREATHING]
And then I want you
to take two more.
[BREATHING]
And breathe out.
Belly button back
toward your spine.
And one more.
[BREATHING]
>>LISA: That actually allows me
to really think clearly, too.
>>SANGWAN: So what it does is
it brings oxygen to your brain.
When people are in
fear or panicked
or having that discomfort
you were talking
about with your husband,
they stop breathing.
Or they do that reverse
breathing where they're--
[SHARP GASPS]
--they're doing this, OK?
>>LISA: Or just
chest up breathing.
>>SANGWAN: Chest up, right?
So where does the best oxygen
exchange occur in your body?
Your lungs go all
the way down here.
And it occurs at the
bases of your lungs.
So we don't usually--
we're running around
in our busy world.
We only use this-- hey, do
you want to go to lunch?
Hey, can you get that for me?
We're only using this
much of our lungs.
So what happens here is,
you have this diaphragm.
It's a thin muscle.
And it looks like an umbrella.
And it's below your lungs
and above your stomach, OK?
When you take a
deep breath in, that
must flatten in order
to keep the air going.
That triggers your vagus nerve.
And that slows down your
heart rate, calms you.
You start to get air,
oxygen to your brain.
All of the sudden now
you're thinking clearly,
creative options, instead of
do I have to get out of here
or shut down?
>>LISA: I love the
medical definitions.
You're right.
The vagus nerve that runs
through the whole body.
And it controls the
central nervous system?
>>SANGWAN: It hits your
parasympathetic nervous system,
which is your relaxation system.
And it runs through
the diaphragm.
So when you start
stimulating the diaphragm,
you're stimulating your vagus.
>>LISA: Wow, that's fabulous.
That's a great way of
visualizing it as well.
>>SANGWAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And it helps you make
decisions, become clearer.
I actually was
talking about that.
I got really clear
in that moment.
Take a look.
If you ever have difficulties
making decisions,
take a look at this video where
Dr. Neha talks about a decision
making tool.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Hi, this is Dr. Neha,
and welcome to my vlog.
Today's topic is on
decision fatigue.
Several of my clients
over the past few weeks
have been asking
me, "Dr. Neha, how
do I know, if I've
made a decision,
whether it was the
right decision or not?
Whether it's about
going to the movies
with a friend when I was
really tired after work,
or am I in the right job?
How do you actually know?"
So it brought me
back to my life,
because they often
ask me, "Dr. Neha,
how did you become
a doctor of science,
initially a doctor of
medicine, and then transition
into being a doctor
of communication?"
So first of all, I want to
say it wasn't that easy.
It wasn't like I woke up
one day and I just knew.
It was a series of
experiences where
I had to listen to my
body and pay attention.
What I'm going to do
today is just distill
that down to a few
easy steps for you.
So I used to work in a
more corporate environment
and also in a hospital.
And one thing I'd notice is
I did well for a few months,
and then my energy would
continue to go down and down.
I would feel drained.
And ultimately I would feel
like I was almost a burnout.
And then I would rest
or take a vacation,
and then I would be
back to normal again.
And this went on and
on until I finally
started getting so tired
that I wasn't recovering.
And so what happened
for me was I noticed
when I was with my clients or my
patients, I really got charged.
I had a lot of energy when
we had a really good exchange
about their life and what
their illness meant to them
in their life, and how it would
help them change their life.
And I had a lot of
energy in me when
I'd go to communication
workshops.
Or when I'd be talking to
a girlfriend on a Saturday,
you know, about how
to change my life
and how to feel inspired
about what's coming up.
We would have these
great conversations.
All of these items were
around communication.
So I started to pay attention.
I also learned that I
enjoyed working with people.
I'm a doctor.
Working with patients
was fantastic.
So I knew that I valued people.
And I started to notice
when I felt more energy.
So I felt more energy when I
was around people and we we
were talking about
communication.
So what I call-- the problem
with decision fatigue is, A,
people are not paying attention
to their body's signals
that they're getting.
I used to get
throat constriction.
I used to have my
stomach turning.
I wasn't paying
attention to any of that.
I was just powering
through my day.
So my first question is, do
you know when you have energy?
When you feel you've
increased your energy,
how does your body tell you?
And when you feel
drained of energy, how
does your body tell you?
So you have to know
those two things first.
And then I'm going
to teach you the two
steps to making good decisions.
So I call it the
decision filter test.
Step one is knowing
what you value.
I value people.
I value healing, health
and communication, love
and connection.
Those are all really,
really important to me.
So if I know what I value,
then all I need to know
is step two, which is what gives
me energy and what drains me
of energy?
So an exercise where
you can do this
is to actually spend the next
seven days, the next week,
just paying attention.
What interactions, situations,
conversations give you energy,
and which ones drain you?
And then the part on values.
What you want to do is,
if you don't know right
off the top of your head-- most
people don't know what they
value, what you do
is think of someone
you really admire,
someone in the world
who seems to have what you want.
And pay attention to what
it is you value about them.
Write those three
to five things down.
And then I want
you to know, those
are actually some of
what you value most.
So you're just going to put
those two things together.
And when you have
a decision that
comes your way, ask
yourself, does it
pass has my values filter test?
I think of it like
a little filter.
Does it pass my
values filter test?
And if it does,
the second question
is do I want to do this?
And you know that if
it gives you energy.
So I hope that the
values filter test
will help making
decisions for you easier.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Well, thank you so much.
It's a pleasure to be with
you, a breath of fresh air
if I might say so.
And an instant camaraderie.
You are like that.
You know you're
like to everyone.
You're like a
girlfriend to everyone.
And a sister.
>>SANGWAN: Thank you.
>>LISA: And a
sister to the guys.
So thank you so much
for being with us today.
I really appreciate it.
>>SANGWAN: Thank you so much.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And I'm sure you got
that feeling as well.
And if you want to watch
the replay of my interview
or share it with your
friends with Dr. Neha,
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time,
communicate and stay inspired.
[LAUGHTER]
Thanks.
>>SANGWAN: Yay.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]